
> I believe that the reviewers simply wanted more explicit mention of what is
> and is not represented by the model — and this is understandable because,
> while the assumptions and limitations of the model are quite clear to a
> reader who "speaks the language" of the manuscript, there is likely to be a
> large contingent of people who don’t speak the language using the PISM
> hydrology model.  Already PISM has a wide user community, and I expect it to
> grow substantially with the release of its hydrological component---and based
> on what I perceive to be a very large scientific community of researchers
> interested in subglacial hydrology, a very small portion of whom are familiar
> with numerical solution of PDEs, there is an ever-increasing need for this
> type of explicit clarity. Just as the authors are concerned about
> misconceptions when non-expert users write and publish high-impact papers on
> the result of this hydrological model---and they will---the reviewers are
> concerned too, and I share this concern.

One might suppose from this comment that it is never mentioned that conduits are
not in the model.

However, the draft in question, sent to this editor on 11 February, includes the
following four sentences, listed with line number, explicitly stating that there
are no conduits in the model:

95   Conduits are not included.

651  Two-dimensional models which include conduits \citep{Schoofmeltsupply} are
     not reductions of our model.

658  Our model has no conduit-like evolution equations at all, though the
     gradient-descent locations of characteristic curves from models using idea
     (ii) may correspond to the locations of conduits in some cases.
    
1118 ... our model has no ``R-channel'' conduit mechanism, in which
     dissipation heating of the flowing water generates wall melt-back.

As there are about 500 sentences in the paper, almost 1% of the paper is already
devoted to denying that the model has conduits.  The introduction and the
conclusion state this.

> Thus, I would like two things made more explicit:
> 
> 1) In the paragraph beginning at line 95, the rationale for not including
> conduits is reasonable from a mathematical standpoint; however, it should be
> acknowledged that channelized flow does occur in Greenland, and is a
> potentially (I say "potentially" yet am confident it is more of a
> "definitely") important physical process to subglacial hydrologic transport
> that is not captured by this model.  That applied mathematics has not yet
> produced a coarse-grained continuum representation of conduits does not mean
> it is not important.

It is never claimed, of course, that either conduits don't exist or that they
are not important.  Rather it is pointed out that existing models of conduits
are inadequate to the task of inclusion into a continuum theory of subglacial
hydrology in two dimensions.  For this reason, they are not included in
our model, which does not, should not, and even cannot (because of
unknown-in-advance user choices), fix a grid or even a grid scale in
advance.

It is apparent that the nonconformity of this claim is driving editorial
overreach here, with a demand for a particular statement, one clearly without
consequence or real scientific content, as a condition for publication.

So, to proceed past this barrier, we have replaced the leading sentence on line
95, i.e. "Conduits are not included." with these two sentences:

    Channelized subglacial flow is widely-assumed to occur
    in Greenland, based on borehole and moulin evidence (Andrews et al., 2014,
    for example).  This important physical process for subglacial hydrologic
    transport is not captured by our model because conduits are not modeled.

> 2) As I see it, eq 32(b) and eq 18 (and the "cap" for W_til) ...

For clarity, we think what is meant are the equation

dW_til/dt = m/\rho_w - C_d

and the inequality

0 <= W_til <= W_til^max

> ... could be included
> with the ice dynamics component of PISM, and eqs 32(a,c) could be solved
> horribly incorrectly, and this would not impact ice dynamics in any way.

This seems to be a statement that the model of till saturation is directly tied
to ice dynamics, through Mohr-Coulomb, while water in the linked-cavity network
has a no influence on ice dynamics, though the ice dynamics influences the
linked-cavity network.

This is correct.  As we point out repeatedly, our model is an extension of
the Tulaczyck work which underlies the actually-observation-supported connection
between basal melt rates and ice
stream flow, that is, the generation of theoretical and field work done on the
Siple Coast ice streams.  That work was all based on the notion that there was
ultimately drainage of the subglacial water in excess of the capacity of the
till.  There is still no evidence that the pressure gradient in the
then-unobserved drainage network affects ice flow, though of course there is
much subglacial modeling based on other ideas that would not explain ice stream
flow.

Regarding whether (32a,c) are solved correctly, this is the first paper to
bother to verify that the coupled solution is correct in more than one
horizontal dimension, through the construction and use of an exact solution.
The editor has other fish to fry than actually being interested in whether
(32a,c) are solved correctly, apparently.

> This is what I believe reviewer 1 meant by 1-way coupling.  If I am wrong I
> must apologize, but I must be convinced. The authors emphasize that the
> velocity solve is nonlocal and so yield stress does not determine basal
> stress locally; this is accepted and besides to point I am making.  I am not
> saying this is *wrong*, or that hydrology can cavity size *should* affect
> basal stress (though in reality I believe it could, see below), but I insist
> this is briefly pointed out in section 4 or 5.

It is a bit hard to respond to this comment.  We explicitly make the point that
we are testing the model in a one-way mode only in the following three locations:

1032 This nontrivial example demonstrates the model at large computational scale
     using real ice sheet geometry, with one-way coupling from ice dynamics giving a
     realistic distributions of overburden pressure, ice sliding speed, and basal
     melt rate.

1080 Thus only one-way coupling was tested: a steady ice dynamics model fed its
     fields to an evolving subglacial hydrology model.

1179 The current paper only demonstrates one-way coupling, in which the PISM ice
     flow and thermodynamics model feeds basal melt rate and sliding velocities
     to the hydrology model.  Two-way coupling  will appear in future work.

The last two sentences are really not obscure; they are the last two sentences
of the conclusion.

The editor says "I insist this is briefly pointed out in section 4 or 5."  To
bring this topic up to the 1%-of-sentences-have-to-make-the-point standard,

